docs: adds instructions for collecting and sending native histograms with otel collector (#9328)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/send/otel-exponential-histograms/_index.md

  - exponential histogram
  - OpenTelemetry
  - instrumentation
menuTitle: OpenTelemetry exponential histograms
title: Send OpenTelemetry exponential histograms to Mimir
weight: 200
---

# Send OpenTelemetry exponential histograms to Mimir

You can collect and send exponential histograms to Mimir with the OpenTelemetry Collector. OpenTelemetry [exponential histograms](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exponentialhistogram) are compatible with Prometheus native histograms. The key difference is that exponential histograms store the `min` and `max` observation values explicitly, whereas native histograms don't. This means that for exponential histograms, you don't need to estimate these values using the 0.0 and 1.0 quantiles.

The OpenTelemetry Collector supports collecting exponential histograms and other compatible data formats, including native histograms and Datadog sketches, through its receivers and sending them through its exporters.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
The availability of different receivers and exporters depends on your OpenTelemetry Collector [distribution](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions/).
{{< /admonition >}}

> You can use the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP) to send exponential histograms to Grafana Mimir in their existing format, or you can use the Prometheus remote write protocol to send them as Prometheus native histograms. Refer to [Send native histograms to Mimir](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/send/native-histograms/).

Reviewer: We did not document sending with OTEL collector, so let's remove the reference. Also I realized when looking into this that there's two OTLP exporters and we only support the one over HTTP protocol.

```suggestion
You can use the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP) over HTTP to send exponential histograms to Grafana Mimir in their existing format, or you can use the Prometheus remote write protocol to send them as Prometheus native histograms.
```

We could refer to the the OTLP HTTP exporter and Promtheus remote write exporter documentation:
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/exporter/otlphttpexporter/README.md
- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md

## Migrate from explicit bucket histograms

To ease the migration process, you can keep the custom bucket definition of an explicit bucket histogram and add a view for the exponential histogram.

1. Start with an existing histogram that uses explicit buckets.
1. Create a view for the exponential histogram. Assign this view a unique name and include the exponential aggregation. This creates a metric with the assigned name and exponential buckets.

   The following example shows how to create a metric called `request_latency_exp` that uses exponential buckets.

   ```
   v := sdkmetric.NewView(sdkmetric.Instrument{
	   	Name: "request_latency",
	   	Kind: sdkmetric.InstrumentKindHistogram,
	   }, sdkmetric.Stream{
		   Name: "request_latency_exp",
		   Aggregation: sdkmetric.AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram{MaxSize: 160, NoMinMax: true, MaxScale: 20},
	   })
   ```

   For more information about creating a view, refer to [View](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#view) in the OpenTelemetry Metrics SDK.

> 1. Modify dashboards to use the exponential histogram metrics. Refer to [Visualize native histograms](https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/<MIMIR_VERSION>/visualize/native-histograms/) for more information.

Author: I can look into this idea for a future PR, especially when this topic goes GA and will have wider readership. We would still need to substitute all of the classic/native details for explicit bucket/exponential, so I'm not sure it would be worth the effort.

---
description: Learn how to collect and send exponential histograms with the OpenTelemetry Collector
menuTitle: OpenTelemetry exponential histograms
title: Collect and send exponential histograms with the OpenTelemetry Collector
weight: 100
---

# Collect and send exponential histograms with the OpenTelemetry Collector

> OpenTelemetry [exponential histograms](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exponentialhistogram) are compatible with Prometheus native histograms. The only significant difference is that exponential histograms store the `min` and `max`  observation values explicitly, but native histograms don't, which means you need to estimate the minimum and maximum by using the 0.0 and 1.0 quantile respectively. 

Author: Do you mean you need to estimate the min and max values for native histograms? If that's the case, can we rephrase this to indicate that for exponential histograms, you don't need to estimate these values, since they are explicitly stored?

Since this topic if about exponential histograms, I think it makes more sense to have that be the focus.

Note: the availability of different receivers and exporters depends on your Collector [distribution](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions/).

Grafana Mimir can receive exponential histograms as is via the OTLP protocol or as Prometheus native histograms over the Prometheus remote write protocol.

OpenTelemetry supports instrumenting applications with the OpenTelemetry SDK. Multiple languages are supported, for the complete list see [Language APIs & SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/).

## Instrument a Go application with the OpenTelemetry SDK

Use the OpenTelemetry SDK version 1.17.0 or later for Go.

1. Set up the collector to handle your metrics data. This includes setting up your resources, meter provider, meter, instruments, and views. Refer to [Metrics](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/instrumentation/#metrics) in the OpenTelemetry SDK documentation for Go.
1. To aggregate a histogram instrument as an exponential histogram, include the following view:

   ```
   Aggregation: metric.AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram{
			MaxSize:  160,
			MaxScale: 20,
		}
   ```

>    For more information, refer to [Registering Views](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/instrumentation/#registering-views) in the OpenTelemetry SDK documentation for Go.

Reviewer 2: I am wondering whether we should add a link regarding the parameter settings: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/sdk.md#base2-exponential-bucket-histogram-aggregation

Reviewer: nice, that's a good idea I think

---
description: Learn how to collect and send exponential histograms with the OpenTelemetry Collector
keywords:
  - send metrics
  - exponential histogram
  - OpenTelemetry
  - instrumentation
menuTitle: OpenTelemetry exponential histograms
title: Send exponential histograms to Mimir
weight: 200
---

# Send exponential histograms to Mimir

> You can collect and send exponential histograms to Mimir with the OpenTelemetry Collector. OpenTelemetry [exponential histograms](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exponentialhistogram) are compatible with Prometheus native histograms. The key difference is that exponential histograms store the `min` and `max`  observation values explicitly, whereas native histograms don't. This means that for exponential histograms, you don't need to estimate these values using the 0.0 and 1.0 quantiles.

Author: @krajorama , I massaged this a little bit to keep the topic's focus on exponential histograms. lmk if this works.

> You can collect and send exponential histograms to Mimir with the OpenTelemetry Collector. OpenTelemetry [exponential histograms](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exponentialhistogram) are compatible with Prometheus native histograms. The key difference is that exponential histograms store the `min` and `max`  observation values explicitly, whereas native histograms don't. This means that for exponential histograms, you don't need to estimate these values using the 0.0 and 1.0 quantiles.

Author: @krajorama , I massaged this a little bit to keep the topic's focus on exponential histograms. lmk if this works.

{{< /admonition >}}

You can use the OpenTelemetry (OTLP) protocol to send exponential histograms to Grafana Mimir in their existing format, or you can use the Prometheus remote write protocol to send them as Prometheus native histograms.

The OpenTelemetry SDK supports instrumenting applications in multiple languages. Refer to [Language APIs & SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/). 

## Instrument an application with the OpenTelemetry SDK using Go

Use the OpenTelemetry SDK version 1.17.0 or later.

1. Set up the OpenTelemetry Collector to handle your metrics data. This includes setting up your resources, meter provider, meter, instruments, and views. Refer to [Metrics](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/instrumentation/#metrics) in the OpenTelemetry SDK documentation for Go.
1. To aggregate a histogram instrument as an exponential histogram, include the following view:

   ```
   Aggregation: metric.AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram{
			MaxSize:  160,
			MaxScale: 20,
		}
   ```

   For more information, refer to [Registering Views](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/go/instrumentation/#registering-views) in the OpenTelemetry SDK documentation for Go.

> ## Migrate from classic histograms

Author: [@krajorama](https://github.com/krajorama) do the migration instructions at https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/next/send/native-histograms/#migrate-from-classic-histograms not apply here? If that's the case, how can people migrate?

Reviewer: The migration starts differently, but from the dashboards (step 5) is the same.

In OTEL the explicit bucket and exponential bucket histograms cannot easily co-exist as the name of the metric would clash. So you start from an existing histogram that uses explicit buckets and add a new [view](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/sdk/#view) where you assign a new *name* as well as exponential aggregation to the histogram. This will result in a new metric with the new name and exponential buckets. For example I have in my test code a histogram called `request_latency` and I can add a new view that will create `request_latency_exp` metric with exponential buckets.
```
v := sdkmetric.NewView(sdkmetric.Instrument{
		Name: "request_latency",
		Kind: sdkmetric.InstrumentKindHistogram,
	}, sdkmetric.Stream{
		Name: "request_latency_exp",
		Aggregation: sdkmetric.AggregationBase2ExponentialHistogram{MaxSize: 160, NoMinMax: true, MaxScale: 20},
		//Aggregation: sdkmetric.DefaultAggregationSelector(sdkmetric.InstrumentKindHistogram),
	})
```

> ## Bucket boundary calculation

Author: @krajorama same question as above.

Reviewer: Almost the same, except the bucket offsets are shifted by one, so in native histogram you have
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/23998c81-d60a-4b2f-aa1b-1d5578498531)
but in otel you have
![otel-bound](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e21af736-2d60-402e-8610-e64f0ccae905)

This isn't terribly interesting for end-users :) See also https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/4a5e6db494acb2d56617266828f8db03957d3960/pkg/translator/prometheusremotewrite/histograms.go#L107

Author: In that case, is this something users need to be aware of at all? Or is it just something that happens in the background?

     {{< /admonition >}}

1. Start adding new recording rules and alerts to use exponential histograms. Don't remove the old recording rules and alerts at this time.
1. It's important to keep scraping both explicit bucket and exponential histograms for at least the period of the longest range in your recording rules and alerts, plus one day. This is the minimum amount of time, but it's recommended to keep scraping both data types until you can verify the new rules and alerts.

   For example, if you have an alert that calculates the rate of requests, such as `sum(rate(http_request_duration_seconds[7d]))`, this query looks at the data from the last seven days plus the Prometheus [lookback period](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/#staleness). When you start sending exponential histograms, the data isn't there for the entire seven days, and therefore, the results might be unreliable for alerting.

1. After configuring exponential histogram collection, choose one of the following ways to stop collecting explicit bucket histograms.

>    - Remove the custom bucket definition, `Buckets`/`classicUpperBounds`, from the instrumentation. In Java, also use the `nativeOnly()` option. Refer to the examples in [Instrument application with Prometheus client libraries](#instrument-application-with-prometheus-client-libraries).

Reviewer: This "Remove the custom bucket definition" is Prometheus specific, I would not go into details, just mention to remove explicit bucket definition and/or view that exposes the explicit buckets.

>    - Drop the explicit bucket histogram series with [Prometheus relabeling](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#relabel_config) or [Grafana Alloy prometheus.relabel](https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/<ALLOY_VERSION>/reference/components/prometheus/prometheus.relabel) at the time of scraping.

Reviewer: I haven't tried it but in the Otel collector you have something like [filter processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/filterprocessor/README.md) that should be possible to utilize for the same purpose. Let's not mix Prometheus or Alloy here for now.
